typeql-src/modules/ROOT/pages/queries/get.adoc, before:

= Get query
:Summary: Reading data from a TypeDB database with a Get query.
:keywords: typeql, query, get, read, retrieve, concepts
:pageTitle: Get query
:page-aliases: typeql::data/get.adoc

A Get query retrieves concepts as stateful objects from a TypeDB database that you can further process with the
xref:drivers::overview.adoc#_driver_api[driver API] methods.
For example, see the xref:manual::objects/data.adoc[data objects] and
xref:manual::objects/schema.adoc[schema objects] pages.

For a practical guide on how to send a Get query to TypeDB,
see the xref:manual::reading/get.adoc[] page of TypeDB Manual.
Get queries can use rule-based xref:manual::reading/infer.adoc[inference].

== Syntax

// tag::syntax[]
A Get query consists of a
<<_match_clause,match>> and a
<<_get_clause,get>> clauses:

[,typeql]
----
match <pattern>
get [<variable> [, <variable>]];
----
// end::syntax[]

[#_behavior]
== Behavior

A Get query retrieves xref:typeql::concepts/overview.adoc[concepts] from a database.

A `match` clause is used to match data by a pattern, while a `get` clause is used to filter the returned variables.

A Get query projects concepts matched from a database to language-specific programmatic stateful objects
that can be used via driver API methods.
The output of a Get query is a lazy stream/iterator of ConceptMap objects, unless it's used with
xref:typeql::modifiers/aggregation.adoc[aggregation], xref:typeql::modifiers/grouping.adoc[grouping], or both.
See the <<_response>> section below.

[#_match_clause]
=== Match clause

A `match` clause in a Get query matches existing concepts in a database to retrieve them as objects.
You can use a declarative and composable TypeQL pattern in a `match` clause and TypeDB will find data that matches
specified pattern.

A `match` clause is mandatory in a Get query.

For more information on patterns and statements used in a `match` clause, see the
xref:typeql::patterns/overview.adoc[Patterns] and xref:typeql::statements/overview.adoc[Statements] sections.

[#_get_clause]
=== Get clause

A `get` clause is used in a Get query to select variables
(xref:typeql::concepts/concept-variables.adoc[concept variables] and
xref:typeql::values/value-variables.adoc[value variables])
to include in the output.
An empty `get` clause (`get;`) includes all variables, used in the preceding `match` clause.

[#_response]
=== Response format

.Response format
[#_table_output_types]
[cols="^.^1,^.^4,^.^4"]
|===
| *#* | *Query* | *Response format*

| 1
| Get query
| Stream/Iterator of *ConceptMap*

| 2
| Get query with aggregation
| *Promise* of *Value*

| 3
| Get query with grouping
| Stream/Iterator of *ConceptMapGroup*

| 4
| Get query with grouping and aggregation
| Stream/Iterator of *ValueGroup*
|===

// .Response format
// [#_table_output_types2]
// [cols="^.^3,^.^3,^.^3"]
// |===
// | | *No aggregation* | *With aggregation*
//
// | *No grouping*
// | Stream/Iterator of *ConceptMap*
// | *Promise* of *Value*
//
// | *With grouping*
// | Stream/Iterator of *ConceptMapGroup*
// | Stream/Iterator of *ValueGroup*
// |===

A Get query returns solutions matched by the `match` clause and filtered by the `get` clause,
optionally processed by xref:typeql::modifiers/overview.adoc[modifiers].
A `get` clause returns exactly one ConceptMap for every solution matched by its preceding `match` clause.
The results are in set semantics, meaning that there are no duplicates.

A ConceptMap object maps query variables to concept objects.
To retrieve a concept object from a ConceptMap, use the driver API `ConceptMap.get(variable)` method,
that takes input of variable's label.
Further processing of a concept object is done via methods of the driver API.
For examples on how to work with schema and data concepts,
see the xref:manual::objects/schema.adoc[] and xref:manual::objects/data.adoc[] pages.

[#_simple_example]
== Usage of a Get query

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

A simple Get query example:

.Get example
[,typeql]
----
match
$p isa person,
    has full-name "Kevin Morrison",
    has email $e;
get $e;
----

The above query uses only two variables: `$p` and `$e`.
The `full-name` attribute is not bound to a variable in this query.

The example above matches person (`$p`) with ownership of the `full-name` attribute with a value of `Kevin Morrison` and
the `email` attribute (`$e`) with any value.
The `get` clause then filters the results to retrieve only the `email` (`$e`) attributes.

The response is a stream/iterator of ConceptMap.
Every ConceptMap bounds the variable `$e` to an attribute of the `email` type, that matches the pattern.

[#_complex_get_query_example]
== Usage of a Get query with modifiers

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

For the next example, let's try a bit more complex pattern and some modifiers:

.Complex Get query example
[,typeql]
----
match
$pe ($x, $y) isa permission;
$x isa person, has full-name $x-n;
$x-n contains "Kevin";
$y (object: $o, action: $act) isa access;
$act has name $act-n;
$o has path $o-fp;
get $x-n, $act-n, $o-fp;
sort $o-fp;
group $o-fp;
count;
----

The example above uses a `match` clause to find data that matches the following conditions:

. `permission` relation (`$pe`) of `$x` and `$y` variables.
. `$x` is `person` entity that has an attribute `$x-n` with the type `full-name`.
. The value of `$x-n` should contain the substring `Kevin`.
. The `$y` is a `access` type relation of `$o` a role of object and `$act` as action.
. `$act` has an attribute `$act-n` with the type `name`.
. `$o` has an attribute `$o-fp` with the value `path`.

The `get` clause then filters the matched answers from the `match` clause to get only the concepts for the
`$x-n`, `$act-n`, `$o-fp` variables.

The results are sorted and grouped by the `$o-fp` and aggregated with the `count` function.

The response is the number of results for every `$o-fp`: number of pairs `$x-n` and `$act-n`.

[#_number_of_results]
== Number of results

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

A Get query can return fewer results, than matched by its `match` clause,
due to filtering with a `get` clause or using modifiers.

[#_get_clause_filtering]
=== Get clause filtering

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

Filtering variables with a `get` clause can reduce the number of results.
Due to set semantics, some results might lose their uniqueness and made redundant.
Let's see the following example with matching entities of the `person` type that have a `full-name` attribute:

.Get clause filter example
[,typeql]
----
match
$p isa person, has full-name $n;
get $n;
----

The `match` clause returns pairs of `person` and its `full-name`.
The `get` clause then returns only the `full-name` attributes.

If multiple entities have the same attribute,
that is represented in a database as ownership of the very same single attribute.
Since we filter the results to have only the `$n` variable, the results include such a name, but only once.
Regardless of how many entities `$p` own it.
To prevent such deduplication, in this example,
you can extend the results to include the `$p` variable into every result, since every entity is unique.
The results then will include pairs of `$p` and `$n`.

=== Using modifiers

Applying xref:typeql::modifiers/overview.adoc[modifiers] can have a drastic effect on the format and number
of results returned by a Get query.
See the <<_table_output_types2,table above>> for output formats depending on the usage of
xref:typeql::modifiers/grouping.adoc[grouping]
and xref:typeql::modifiers/aggregation.adoc[aggregation].

Usage of the xref:typeql::modifiers/pagination.adoc#_limit_the_results[limit] modifier directly sets a limitation
for the number of results.

Combination of <<_get_clause_filtering>> and xref:typeql::modifiers/sorting.adoc[] can produce
somewhat unpredictable results, if sorting is done by a variable, that is not included in the `get` clause.

////
[#_results_example_1]
== Permutations

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

If there are multiple variables returned in every result,
then results of a query include all permutations of answers.

To illustrate that behavior, let's
see what happens if we have *three* `person` entities
matched by two different variables:

.Permutations example
[,typeql]
----
match
$x isa person;
$y isa person;
get $x, $y;
count;
----

The xref:typeql::modifiers/aggregation.adoc#_count[count modifier] is added to get the number of results,
rather than the results themselves.

How many results are we expecting to retrieve from a database?

Given that there are three data instances of the person type, the matched results include all
solutions for the pattern in the `match` clause, including all permutations.
We can match the same person twice by both `$x` and `$y`.
So, for every `$x` there are three concepts in `$y` and vice versa.
That means the query counts nine results.

For more explanation and examples, see the
xref:learn::7-understanding-query-patterns/7.6-solution-set-semantics.adoc[] page in the TypeDB Learning course.
////

////
[#_results_example_2]
=== Variables filtering

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

For the following example, consider the following database schema:

[,typeql]
----
define

name sub attribute, value string;
age sub attribute, value long;
certified-fortune-teller sub attribute, value boolean;

person sub entity,
    owns name,
    owns age,
    owns certified-fortune-teller;
----

Let's explore the following query:

[,typeql]
----
match
$p isa person,
    has name `Bob`,
    has age 31,
    has certified-fortune-teller $cft;
get $p, $cft;
----

The above query will find every `person` entity that has ownership over the instance of the attribute type `name` with
the value of `Bob`, ownership of the `age` with the value of `31`, and the ownership of the `certified-fortune-teller`
attribute with any value.

With the `get` clause, we filter the results to get the `person` instances and the corresponding
`certified-fortune-teller` attribute (represented by the `$cft` variable in the pattern) for every matched result
in a database.

[#_explanation_of_filter]
_Why not filter for just the `$cft` variable instead?_

That can drastically alter the returned results as the returned results are deduplicated by design. See the
<<_number_of_results>> section above for more information on the number of results for a Get query.

For example, let's say we have ten people with the name `Bob` and age `31` in our database.
Five of them have `certified-fortune-teller` with the value `false`, one has it as `true`,
and the rest don't have an ownership of the attribute.

[#_answers_example2_dataset]
.See how to load such a dataset into a database
[%collapsible]
====
In xref:manual::studio.adoc[TypeDB Studio], we can paste the following TypeQL in the text editor
and send all the queries by a single click in a data/write mode.
Make sure to commit the changes.

[,typeql]
----
# These are the 5 instances of people with name Bob, age 31 and not cretified fortune tellers
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has name "Bobby", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;

# This is the one and only instance of a person with name Bob, age 31 and a cretified fortune teller
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller true;

# These are the 4 instances of people with name Bob, age 31. No ownership of the boolean attribute
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has name "Robert Jr.", has age 31;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31;

# These are some random people, that doesn't meet pattern (Name: Bob and Age: 31)
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 20;
insert $p isa person, has name "Alex", has age 78, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Alice", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller true;
insert $p isa person;
----

To insert this dataset with any xref:drivers::overview.adoc[other] client --
make sure to send every line, except from comments, as a separate insert query.

For more information on an Insert query, see the xref:typeql::queries/insert.adoc[] page.
====

Those Bobs that don't have the attribute ownership won't be matched by the `match` clause at all.
So we expect to get *six* results from the original Get query:
five `person` instances owning the attribute with value `false` and one with `true`.

If we remove the `$p` variable and use `get $cft;` clause instead,
we'll get only two results in response because we will only get
`certified-fortune-teller` instances, and there are only two of those: an instance with the `true` value and another
instance of the same type with the `false` value.

The initial five instances of `person` type all have ownership over the
same attribute of the `certified-fortune-teller` attribute type
with the value `false`.

To get all the results, we add the `person` type instances to the results because those are unique.
Even if some of them might have the exact same set of owned attributes, instances of the `person` type are
different instances nonetheless.

To try the get queries in that example, we need to load the <<_results_example_2,schema>> and
the <<_answers_example2_dataset,dataset>> provided above into a TypeDB database first.
////

== Learn more

[cols-2]
--
.xref:learn::7-understanding-query-patterns/7-understanding-query-patterns.adoc[]
[.clickable]
****
Learn more about query patterns in the TypeDB Learning course.
****

.xref:manual::reading/get.adoc[]
[.clickable]
****
See how to send a Get query to TypeDB.
****

.xref:manual::objects/schema.adoc[]
[.clickable]
****
See how to manipulate Schema stateful objects with driver API.
****

.xref:manual::objects/data.adoc[]
[.clickable]
****
See how to manipulate Data stateful objects with driver API.
****
--

Commit message:

Minor fixes for Fetch and Get pages in TypeQL

typeql-src/modules/ROOT/pages/queries/get.adoc, after:

= Get query
:Summary: Reading data from a TypeDB database with a Get query.
:keywords: typeql, query, get, read, retrieve, concepts
:pageTitle: Get query
:page-aliases: typeql::data/get.adoc

A Get query retrieves concepts as stateful objects from a TypeDB database that you can further process with the
xref:drivers::overview.adoc#_driver_api[driver API] methods.
For example, see the xref:manual::objects/data.adoc[data objects] and
xref:manual::objects/schema.adoc[schema objects] pages.

For a practical guide on how to send a Get query to TypeDB,
see the xref:manual::reading/get.adoc[] page of TypeDB Manual.
Get queries can use rule-based xref:manual::reading/infer.adoc[inference].

== Syntax

// tag::syntax[]
A Get query consists of a
<<_match_clause,match>> and a
<<_get_clause,get>> clauses:

[,typeql]
----
match <pattern>
get [<variable> [, <variable>]];
----
// end::syntax[]

[#_behavior]
== Behavior

A Get query retrieves xref:typeql::concepts/overview.adoc[concepts] from a database.

A `match` clause is used to match data by a pattern, while a `get` clause is used to filter the returned variables.

A Get query projects concepts matched from a database to language-specific programmatic stateful objects
that can be used via driver API methods.
The output of a Get query is a lazy stream/iterator of ConceptMap objects, unless it's used with
xref:typeql::modifiers/aggregation.adoc[aggregation], xref:typeql::modifiers/grouping.adoc[grouping], or both.
See the <<_response>> section below.

You can use xref:typeql::modifiers/sorting.adoc[sorting] and
xref:typeql::modifiers/pagination.adoc[pagination] with a Fetch query.

[#_match_clause]
=== Match clause

A `match` clause in a Get query matches existing concepts in a database to retrieve them as objects.
You can use a declarative and composable TypeQL pattern in a `match` clause and TypeDB will find data that matches
specified pattern.

A `match` clause is mandatory in a Get query.

For more information on patterns and statements used in a `match` clause, see the
xref:typeql::patterns/overview.adoc[Patterns] and xref:typeql::statements/overview.adoc[Statements] sections.

[#_get_clause]
=== Get clause

A `get` clause is used in a Get query to select variables
(xref:typeql::concepts/concept-variables.adoc[concept variables] and
xref:typeql::values/value-variables.adoc[value variables])
to include in the output.
An empty `get` clause (`get;`) includes all variables, used in the preceding `match` clause.

[#_response]
=== Response format

.Response format
[#_table_output_types]
[cols="^.^1,^.^4,^.^4"]
|===
| *#* | *Query* | *Response format*

| 1
| Get query
| Stream/Iterator of *ConceptMap*

| 2
| Get query with aggregation
| *Promise* of *Value*

| 3
| Get query with grouping
| Stream/Iterator of *ConceptMapGroup*

| 4
| Get query with grouping and aggregation
| Stream/Iterator of *ValueGroup*
|===

// .Response format
// [#_table_output_types2]
// [cols="^.^3,^.^3,^.^3"]
// |===
// | | *No aggregation* | *With aggregation*
//
// | *No grouping*
// | Stream/Iterator of *ConceptMap*
// | *Promise* of *Value*
//
// | *With grouping*
// | Stream/Iterator of *ConceptMapGroup*
// | Stream/Iterator of *ValueGroup*
// |===

A Get query returns solutions matched by the `match` clause and filtered by the `get` clause,
optionally processed by xref:typeql::modifiers/overview.adoc[modifiers].
A `get` clause returns exactly one ConceptMap for every solution matched by its preceding `match` clause.
The results are in set semantics, meaning that there are no duplicates.

A ConceptMap object maps query variables to concept objects.
To retrieve a concept object from a ConceptMap, use the driver API `ConceptMap.get(variable)` method,
that takes input of variable's label.
Further processing of a concept object is done via methods of the driver API.
For examples on how to work with schema and data concepts,
see the xref:manual::objects/schema.adoc[] and xref:manual::objects/data.adoc[] pages.

[#_simple_example]
== Usage of a Get query

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

A simple Get query example:

.Get example
[,typeql]
----
match
$p isa person,
    has full-name "Kevin Morrison",
    has email $e;
get $e;
----

The above query uses only two variables: `$p` and `$e`.
The `full-name` attribute is not bound to a variable in this query.

The example above matches person (`$p`) with ownership of the `full-name` attribute with a value of `Kevin Morrison` and
the `email` attribute (`$e`) with any value.
The `get` clause then filters the results to retrieve only the `email` (`$e`) attributes.

The response is a stream/iterator of ConceptMap.
Every ConceptMap bounds the variable `$e` to an attribute of the `email` type, that matches the pattern.

[#_complex_get_query_example]
== Usage of a Get query with modifiers

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

For the next example, let's try a bit more complex pattern and some modifiers:

.Complex Get query example
[,typeql]
----
match
$pe ($x, $y) isa permission;
$x isa person, has full-name $x-n;
$x-n contains "Kevin";
$y (object: $o, action: $act) isa access;
$act has name $act-n;
$o has path $o-fp;
get $x-n, $act-n, $o-fp;
sort $o-fp;
group $o-fp;
count;
----

The example above uses a `match` clause to find data that matches the following conditions:

. `permission` relation (`$pe`) of `$x` and `$y` variables.
. `$x` is `person` entity that has an attribute `$x-n` with the type `full-name`.
. The value of `$x-n` should contain the substring `Kevin`.
. The `$y` is a `access` type relation of `$o` a role of object and `$act` as action.
. `$act` has an attribute `$act-n` with the type `name`.
. `$o` has an attribute `$o-fp` with the value `path`.

The `get` clause then filters the matched answers from the `match` clause to get only the concepts for the
`$x-n`, `$act-n`, `$o-fp` variables.

The results are sorted and grouped by the `$o-fp` and aggregated with the `count` function.

The response is the number of results for every `$o-fp`: number of pairs `$x-n` and `$act-n`.

[#_number_of_results]
== Number of results

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

A Get query can return fewer results, than matched by its `match` clause,
due to filtering with a `get` clause or using modifiers.

[#_get_clause_filtering]
=== Get clause filtering

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

Filtering variables with a `get` clause can reduce the number of results.
Due to set semantics, some results might lose their uniqueness and made redundant.
Let's see the following example with matching entities of the `person` type that have a `full-name` attribute:

.Get clause filter example
[,typeql]
----
match
$p isa person, has full-name $n;
get $n;
----

The `match` clause returns pairs of `person` and its `full-name`.
The `get` clause then returns only the `full-name` attributes.

If multiple entities have the same attribute,
that is represented in a database as ownership of the very same single attribute.
Since we filter the results to have only the `$n` variable, the results include such a name, but only once.
Regardless of how many entities `$p` own it.
To prevent such deduplication, in this example,
you can extend the results to include the `$p` variable into every result, since every entity is unique.
The results then will include pairs of `$p` and `$n`.

=== Using modifiers

Applying xref:typeql::modifiers/overview.adoc[modifiers] can have a drastic effect on the format and number
of results returned by a Get query.
See the <<_table_output_types2,table above>> for output formats depending on the usage of
xref:typeql::modifiers/grouping.adoc[grouping]
and xref:typeql::modifiers/aggregation.adoc[aggregation].

Usage of the xref:typeql::modifiers/pagination.adoc#_limit_the_results[limit] modifier directly sets a limitation
for the number of results.

Combination of <<_get_clause_filtering>> and xref:typeql::modifiers/sorting.adoc[] can produce
somewhat unpredictable results, if sorting is done by a variable, that is not included in the `get` clause.

////
[#_results_example_1]
== Permutations

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

If there are multiple variables returned in every result,
then results of a query include all permutations of answers.

To illustrate that behavior, let's
see what happens if we have *three* `person` entities
matched by two different variables:

.Permutations example
[,typeql]
----
match
$x isa person;
$y isa person;
get $x, $y;
count;
----

The xref:typeql::modifiers/aggregation.adoc#_count[count modifier] is added to get the number of results,
rather than the results themselves.

How many results are we expecting to retrieve from a database?

Given that there are three data instances of the person type, the matched results include all
solutions for the pattern in the `match` clause, including all permutations.
We can match the same person twice by both `$x` and `$y`.
So, for every `$x` there are three concepts in `$y` and vice versa.
That means the query counts nine results.

For more explanation and examples, see the
xref:learn::7-understanding-query-patterns/7.6-solution-set-semantics.adoc[] page in the TypeDB Learning course.
////

////
[#_results_example_2]
=== Variables filtering

include::typeql::partial$iam-database-links.adoc[]

For the following example, consider the following database schema:

[,typeql]
----
define

name sub attribute, value string;
age sub attribute, value long;
certified-fortune-teller sub attribute, value boolean;

person sub entity,
    owns name,
    owns age,
    owns certified-fortune-teller;
----

Let's explore the following query:

[,typeql]
----
match
$p isa person,
    has name `Bob`,
    has age 31,
    has certified-fortune-teller $cft;
get $p, $cft;
----

The above query will find every `person` entity that has ownership over the instance of the attribute type `name` with
the value of `Bob`, ownership of the `age` with the value of `31`, and the ownership of the `certified-fortune-teller`
attribute with any value.

With the `get` clause, we filter the results to get the `person` instances and the corresponding
`certified-fortune-teller` attribute (represented by the `$cft` variable in the pattern) for every matched result
in a database.

[#_explanation_of_filter]
_Why not filter for just the `$cft` variable instead?_

That can drastically alter the returned results as the returned results are deduplicated by design. See the
<<_number_of_results>> section above for more information on the number of results for a Get query.

For example, let's say we have ten people with the name `Bob` and age `31` in our database.
Five of them have `certified-fortune-teller` with the value `false`, one has it as `true`,
and the rest don't have an ownership of the attribute.

[#_answers_example2_dataset]
.See how to load such a dataset into a database
[%collapsible]
====
In xref:manual::studio.adoc[TypeDB Studio], we can paste the following TypeQL in the text editor
and send all the queries by a single click in a data/write mode.
Make sure to commit the changes.

[,typeql]
----
# These are the 5 instances of people with name Bob, age 31 and not cretified fortune tellers
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has name "Bobby", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller false;

# This is the one and only instance of a person with name Bob, age 31 and a cretified fortune teller
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller true;

# These are the 4 instances of people with name Bob, age 31. No ownership of the boolean attribute
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has name "Robert Jr.", has age 31;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31;
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 31;

# These are some random people, that doesn't meet pattern (Name: Bob and Age: 31)
insert $p isa person, has name "Bob", has age 20;
insert $p isa person, has name "Alex", has age 78, has certified-fortune-teller false;
insert $p isa person, has name "Alice", has age 31, has certified-fortune-teller true;
insert $p isa person;
----

To insert this dataset with any xref:drivers::overview.adoc[other] client --
make sure to send every line, except from comments, as a separate insert query.

For more information on an Insert query, see the xref:typeql::queries/insert.adoc[] page.
====

Those Bobs that don't have the attribute ownership won't be matched by the `match` clause at all.
So we expect to get *six* results from the original Get query:
five `person` instances owning the attribute with value `false` and one with `true`.

If we remove the `$p` variable and use `get $cft;` clause instead,
we'll get only two results in response because we will only get
`certified-fortune-teller` instances, and there are only two of those: an instance with the `true` value and another
instance of the same type with the `false` value.

The initial five instances of `person` type all have ownership over the
same attribute of the `certified-fortune-teller` attribute type
with the value `false`.

To get all the results, we add the `person` type instances to the results because those are unique.
Even if some of them might have the exact same set of owned attributes, instances of the `person` type are
different instances nonetheless.

To try the get queries in that example, we need to load the <<_results_example_2,schema>> and
the <<_answers_example2_dataset,dataset>> provided above into a TypeDB database first.
////

== Learn more

[cols-2]
--
.xref:learn::7-understanding-query-patterns/7-understanding-query-patterns.adoc[]
[.clickable]
****
Learn more about query patterns in the TypeDB Learning course.
****

.xref:manual::reading/get.adoc[]
[.clickable]
****
See how to send a Get query to TypeDB.
****

.xref:manual::objects/schema.adoc[]
[.clickable]
****
See how to manipulate Schema stateful objects with driver API.
****

.xref:manual::objects/data.adoc[]
[.clickable]
****
See how to manipulate Data stateful objects with driver API.
****
--
