0001-typedb/03-admin/04-ha.md, before:

---
pageTitle: High availability
keywords: typedb, ha, replication, failover, raft
longTailKeywords: TypeDB replication, TypeDB high availability, high availability
summary: TypeDB high availability guarantees and solution.
toc: false
---

# High availability

## Overview

<div class="note">
[Note]
High availability features are available only in TypeDB Cloud.
</div>

TypeDB Cloud supports the following high availability features: 

* Server clustering,
* [Strongly consistent model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strong_consistency),
* Data and schema replication with primary/secondary replicas,
* Primary replica failover using [Raft consensus algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)),
* Synchronous replication using [Raft consensus algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)),
* Client level load balancing.

## Replication

TypeDB replication is performed at the database level. Specifically, there is a separate replication group for each 
database. There can be multiple replicas of a database, but only one 
per server.

There are two types of replicas: primary replica and secondary ones (or leader and followers in Raft terms). There can 
be only one primary replica of a database at any given time. It is possible that primary replicas of different 
databases can be on the same or different servers. Primary replicas location can’t be set manually, only through
the internal [election process](#leader-election) (as per Raft algorithm). Leader elections should happen relatively rarely in a stable network.

By default, all write and read operations are performed on the primary replica. Reads from secondary replicas have 
no guarantee of up-to-date data. But reads can be very costly (especially using the inference option). The "**read any replica**"
transaction option allows clients to read data from the primary or secondary replicas with automatic load balancing.
Client will choose a random replica to balance the load between replicas. 

<div class="note">
[Note]
TypeDB Cloud uses ZeroMQ for replication and gRPC for replication management.
</div>

### Primary replica failover

All replicas start as secondary replica. The only way for replica to become a primary is to win an election. Election 
is won by a replica which is voted by the majority of replicas in cluster.

Any secondary that didn't hear from a primary for a set time out period plus/minus random margin will start an 
election. Every replica will participate in only one election at the same time.

This is an internal process and should not be visible to users and applications, as TypeDB Clients should be able to deal with that transparently (apart from possible query response error due to server failure, that caused the failover/election event).

For more information on Raft consensus algorithm please read the [Raft algorithm documentation](https://raft.github.io/).

### Synchronous replication

To support synchronous replication TypeDB Cloud sends transaction acknowledgement to a client only when consensus is 
reached — when the majority of replicas acknowledge receiving the replicated data.

## Data persistence

TypeDB uses [RocksDB](https://rocksdb.org/) for data persistence. 

RocksDB is a durable storage layer with an internal write-ahead log (WAL). The data is stored as
files on a filesystem. WAL is used to restore data that didn't get to the main storage of a server due to a 
sudden crash or a power loss.

There are two main sorts of data being persisted:

1. Database schema and data instances.
2. Raft replication log.

Both are persisted in directories set in the configuration file. Those can be separate directories or the same one. 
The paths to the storage directories can be overridden by command line arguments.

## Load balancing

Load balancing can be done by any TypeDB Client for read type transactions with the `read_any_replica` option set to 
`True`.

When instantiated, client usually set up with a list of all replica addresses. Additionally, it can use auto-discovery 
function to discover missing replicas. It’s done by obtaining list of known servers in the cluster from a server TypeDB 
Client was able to connect to.

Commit message:

Add note on replication log to elections

0001-typedb/03-admin/04-ha.md, after:

---
pageTitle: High availability
keywords: typedb, ha, replication, failover, raft
longTailKeywords: TypeDB replication, TypeDB high availability, high availability
summary: TypeDB high availability guarantees and solution.
toc: false
---

# High availability

## Overview

<div class="note">
[Note]
High availability features are available only in TypeDB Cloud.
</div>

TypeDB Cloud supports the following high availability features: 

* Server clustering,
* [Strongly consistent model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strong_consistency),
* Data and schema replication with primary/secondary replicas,
* Primary replica failover using [Raft consensus algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)),
* Synchronous replication using [Raft consensus algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)),
* Client level load balancing.

## Replication

TypeDB replication is performed at the database level. Specifically, there is a separate replication group for each 
database. There can be multiple replicas of a database, but only one 
per server.

There are two types of replicas: primary replica and secondary ones (or leader and followers in Raft terms). There can 
be only one primary replica of a database at any given time. It is possible that primary replicas of different 
databases can be on the same or different servers. Primary replicas location can’t be set manually, only through
the internal [election process](#leader-election) (as per Raft algorithm). Leader elections should happen relatively rarely in a stable network.

By default, all write and read operations are performed on the primary replica. Reads from secondary replicas have 
no guarantee of up-to-date data. But reads can be very costly (especially using the inference option). The "**read any replica**"
transaction option allows clients to read data from the primary or secondary replicas with automatic load balancing.
Client will choose a random replica to balance the load between replicas. 

<div class="note">
[Note]
TypeDB Cloud uses ZeroMQ for replication and gRPC for replication management.
</div>

### Primary replica failover

All replicas start as secondary replica. The only way for replica to become a primary is to win an election. Election 
is won by a replica which is voted by the majority of replicas in cluster.

Any secondary that didn't hear from a primary for a set time out period plus/minus random margin will start an 
election. Every replica will participate in only one election at the same time.

This is an internal process and should not be visible to users and applications, as TypeDB Clients should be able to deal with that transparently (apart from possible query response error due to server failure, that caused the failover/election event).

<div class="note">
[Important]
The candidate calls for an election with a special message, that allows all other replicas to check whether the 
candidate meets all the requirements, e.g. have the latest replication log records and have information from the 
previous election. Only if all requirements are met replica will cast its vote for the candidate.
</div>

For more information on Raft consensus algorithm please read the [Raft algorithm documentation](https://raft.github.io/).

### Synchronous replication

To support synchronous replication TypeDB Cloud sends transaction acknowledgement to a client only when consensus is 
reached — when the majority of replicas acknowledge receiving the replicated data.

## Data persistence

TypeDB uses [RocksDB](https://rocksdb.org/) for data persistence. 

RocksDB is a durable storage layer with an internal write-ahead log (WAL). The data is stored as
files on a filesystem. WAL is used to restore data that didn't get to the main storage of a server due to a 
sudden crash or a power loss.

There are two main sorts of data being persisted:

1. Database schema and data instances.
2. Raft replication log.

Both are persisted in directories set in the configuration file. Those can be separate directories or the same one. 
The paths to the storage directories can be overridden by command line arguments.

## Load balancing

Load balancing can be done by any TypeDB Client for read type transactions with the `read_any_replica` option set to 
`True`.

When instantiated, client usually set up with a list of all replica addresses. Additionally, it can use auto-discovery 
function to discover missing replicas. It’s done by obtaining list of known servers in the cluster from a server TypeDB 
Client was able to connect to.
