cloud-src/modules/ROOT/pages/quickstart.adoc, before:

= Quickstart guide
:keywords: start, typedb, cloud, quickstart, tutorial, registration
:longTailKeywords: getting started, get started with typedb cloud, typedb cloud tutorial, typedb cloud quickstart
:pageTitle: Quickstart guide
:summary: How to start using TypeDB Cloud.
:experimental:

== Overview

In this Quickstart guide we will find out how to start using TypeDB Cloud:

* Get an account
* Log In
* Create a deployment
* Connect to a TypeDB Enterprise cluster

== Get an account

include::cloud::account.adoc[tag=create-account]

== Log in

include::cloud::account.adoc[tag=log-in]

== Create a deployment

include::cloud::deployments/life-cycle.adoc[tag=create]

== Connect to a TypeDB Enterprise cluster

To connect to a TypeDB Cloud deployment we can use any TypeDB Client: see the xref:deployments/connect.adoc[] page.

For example, to connect via TypeDB Console:

// tag::console-connect[]
[,bash]
----
./typedb console --cluster=<address> --username=admin --password=password --tls-enabled=false
----

where:

*  `<address>` -- is the address of a server in the TypeDB Cloud installation we are connecting to,
including the port number. +
For example, `a242676f5710e462e9eed7a78d795ecb-1969767772.eu-west-2.elb.amazonaws.com:1729`.
* `admin` -- is the default username for the default user in any deployment of TypeDB Cloud during alpha-testing stage.
* `password` -- is the default password for the default user.
* `false` -- is the TLS encryption setting. It's false (disabled) by default for now, but that can change soon as
TypeDB Cloud is in alpha-testing stage.

As a result we get a welcome message from TypeDB Console, and if the connection was successful,
it's followed by a command line prompt.

[,bash]
----
Welcome to TypeDB Console. You are now in TypeDB Wonderland!
Copyright (C) 2022 Vaticle

>
----
// end::console-connect[]

== Learn more

Check the current account details on the xref:cloud::account.adoc[] page.

Find out how to manage deployments in the *Deployment management* section:

* xref:cloud::deployments/life-cycle.adoc[] -- how to create, destroy, suspend, and resume deployments.
* xref:cloud::deployments/connect.adoc[] -- how to connect to a server in a deployment with TypeDB Clients.
* xref:cloud::deployments/projects.adoc[] -- how to group deployments for easier management.

Explore the user management options in the *User management* section:

* xref:cloud::user-management/user.adoc[] -- how to create, delete, and see details of a user.
* xref:cloud::user-management/team.adoc[] -- how to group users in teams for easier management.
* xref:cloud::user-management/organization.adoc[] -- how to manage an organization.

Commit message:

Quickstart, overview and connection pages fixes

cloud-src/modules/ROOT/pages/quickstart.adoc, after:

= Quickstart guide
:keywords: start, typedb, cloud, quickstart, tutorial, registration
:longTailKeywords: getting started, get started with typedb cloud, typedb cloud tutorial, typedb cloud quickstart
:pageTitle: Quickstart guide
:summary: How to start using TypeDB Cloud.
:experimental:

== Overview

In this Quickstart guide we will find out how to start using TypeDB Cloud:

* Get an account
* Log In
* Create a deployment
* Connect to a TypeDB Enterprise cluster

== Get an account

include::cloud::account.adoc[tag=create-account]

== Log in

include::cloud::account.adoc[tag=log-in]

== Create a deployment

include::cloud::deployments/life-cycle.adoc[tag=create]

Now that the deployment is being created all we need is to wait for the status of the deployment to become
`Fully available`.

== Connect to a deployment

To work with the TypeDB servers of the deployment we need to set up a TypeDB Client and connect it to the deployment
cluster.

[NOTE]
====
At this stage of alpha-testing, all TypeDB Cloud deployments are created with the listening port of `1729`
and a default user with the following credentials:

Username: `admin` +
Password: `password`
====

To connect to a TypeDB Cloud deployment we can use any TypeDB Client: see the xref:deployments/connect.adoc[] page
for more options.

For example, to connect via TypeDB Console:

// tag::console-connect[]
[,bash]
----
typedb console --cluster=<address> --username=admin --password=password --tls-enabled=false
----

where:

*  `<address>` -- is the address of a server in the TypeDB Cloud installation we are connecting to,
including the port number. +
For example, `a242676f5710e462e9eed7a78d795ecb-196767772.eu-west-2.elb.amazonaws.com:1729`.
* `admin` -- is the default username for the default user.
* `password` -- is the default password for the default user.
* `false` -- is the TLS encryption setting. It's false (disabled) by default for now, but that can change soon as
TypeDB Cloud is in alpha-testing stage.

As a result we get a welcome message from TypeDB Console, and if the connection was successful,
it's followed by a command line prompt.

[,bash]
----
Welcome to TypeDB Console. You are now in TypeDB Wonderland!
Copyright (C) 2022 Vaticle

>
----

For more information on how to use TypeDB Console, see the xref:clients::console.adoc[] page.
// end::console-connect[]

For more information on how to connect with other TypeDB Clients, see the
xref:cloud::deployments/connect.adoc#_connection[Connect to a deployment] page.

== Learn more

Check the current account details on the xref:cloud::account.adoc[] page.

Find out how to manage deployments in the *Deployment management* section:

* xref:cloud::deployments/life-cycle.adoc[] -- how to create, destroy, suspend, and resume deployments.
* xref:cloud::deployments/connect.adoc[] -- how to connect to a server in a deployment with TypeDB Clients.
* xref:cloud::deployments/projects.adoc[] -- how to group deployments for easier management.

Explore the user management options in the *User management* section:

* xref:cloud::user-management/user.adoc[] -- how to create, delete, and see details of a user.
* xref:cloud::user-management/team.adoc[] -- how to group users in teams for easier management.
* xref:cloud::user-management/organization.adoc[] -- how to manage an organization.
