cloud-src/modules/ROOT/pages/deployments/connect.adoc, before:

= Connect to a deployment
:keywords: typedb, deployment, cloud, connect, connection, query
:longTailKeywords: connect to a deployment, connect to a cluster, typedb cloud connection
:pageTitle: Connect to a deployment
:summary: How to connect to a TypeDB Cloud deployment.
:experimental:

TypeDB Cloud deployment is a cluster of TypeDB Enterprise servers.
As such it can receive connections from xref:clients::clients.adoc[TypeDB Clients]:

* TypeDB Studio
* TypeDB Console
* TypeDB Drivers:
** Java
** Python
** Node.js

To connect to a TypeDB Cloud deployment we need the following information:

* *Address* of any server in the deployment:
** Ip-address or domain name -- generated for every server in a deployment upon creation.
** Port number that the server is configured to listen to -- by default it's `1729`.
* *Credentials* of any user to authenticate on the server:
** Username -- by default it's `admin`.
** Password -- by default it's `password`.

////
* Whether the encryption is enabled or not.
** If the encryption is enabled - whether to use the default certificate or a custom one.
////
[IMPORTANT]
====
Connection to a TypeDB Enterprise server requires valid credentials of a user existing on that server.

It is not the same user as the user on TypeDB Cloud web portal that created or has access to the deployment.
====

To get the *address* of the server in a deployment use the following steps:

* Open the xref:deployments/life-cycle.adoc#_details[deployment details] page.
* Find the `Address` column in the table in the `Machines` section.

We can change the *credentials* with:

* xref:clients::console.adoc[TypeDB Console]
* Driver API:
** xref:clients::java/java-api-ref.adoc#_set_a_users_password[Java]
** xref:clients::python/python-api-ref.adoc#_set_a_users_password[Python]
** xref:clients::node-js/node-js-api-ref.adoc#_set_a_users_password[Node.js]


== Connection

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Studio::
+
--
To connect to a TypeDB Cloud deployment with TypeDB Studio we can use the
xref:clients::studio.adoc#_connect_to_typedb_server[basic connection guide], but we need to select the TypeDB Cluster
option in the drop-down menu at the Connect to TypeDB window. That will display additional options to set addresses for
multiple servers in a cluster, username, password, and TLS encryption switch.

image::studio-connect.png[Connect to Studio window, width = 70%, link=self]

Use the btn:[Manage cluster addresses] button to set the address of a server to connect.

image::studio-manage-cluster-address.png[Connect to Studio window, width = 70%, link=self]

Insert the TypeDB Cloud deployment server address (including the port number, for example, `127.0.0.1:1729` or rather
`a242676f5710e462e9eed7a78d795ecb-1969767772.eu-west-2.elb.amazonaws.com:1729`) to the text field and press
the btn:[Add] button.
--

TypeDB Console::
+
--
include::cloud::quickstart.adoc[tag=console-connect]
--

TypeDB Java Driver::
+
--
[,java]
----
TypeDBClient client = TypeDB.coreClient("0.0.0.0:1729");
----

//#todo Update the code snippet with cluster version

For more information explore the TypeDB Java Driver API
xref:clients::java/java-api-ref.adoc#_instantiating_a_typedb_cluster_client[reference].
--

TypeDB Python Driver::
+
--
[,python]
----
credentials = TypeDBCredential("admin", "password",
                               "/server/conf/encryption/ext-root-ca.pem")
client = TypeDB.cluster_client("127.0.0.1:1729", credentials)
----

For more information explore the TypeDB Python Driver API
xref:clients::python/python-api-ref.adoc#_instantiating_a_typedb_cluster_client[reference].
--

TypeDB Node.js Driver::
+
--
[,js]
----
client = TypeDB.coreClient("0.0.0.0:1729");
----

//#todo Update the code snippet with cluster version

For more information explore the TypeDB Node.js Driver API
xref:clients::node-js/node-js-api-ref.adoc#_instantiating_a_typedb_cluster_client[reference].
--
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
Ideally, we want to set all servers of the cluster to connect to. But if we set address for only one server,
upon connection, TypeDB Client will get information of all servers in the cluster.
====

==  What to do next?

Upon successful connection to a server in a TypeDB Cloud deployment we can use the TypeDB Client we have used
to connect to send some queries to the server.

For example, establish a `schema` xref:typedb::development/connect.adoc#_sessions[session],
open a `write` xref:typedb::development/connect.adoc#_transactions[transaction],
send a `define` xref:typedb::fundamentals/queries.adoc[query] and commit the transaction.

For more information, see the:

* xref:typedb::overview.adoc[TypeDB documentation] for general understanding of how to use TypeDB server,
* xref:clients::clients.adoc[TypeDB Clients documentation] for information on how to use Driver API methods,
TypeDB Studio GUI, or TypeDB Console CLI,
* xref:typeql::overview.adoc[TypeQL documentation] for advanced understanding of how to build a query.

Commit message:

Quickstart, overview and connection pages fixes

cloud-src/modules/ROOT/pages/deployments/connect.adoc, after:

= Connect to a deployment
:keywords: typedb, deployment, cloud, connect, connection, query
:longTailKeywords: connect to a deployment, connect to a cluster, typedb cloud connection
:pageTitle: Connect to a deployment
:summary: How to connect to a TypeDB Cloud deployment.
:experimental:

TypeDB Cloud deployment is a cluster of TypeDB Enterprise servers.
As such it can receive connections from xref:clients::clients.adoc[TypeDB Clients]:

* TypeDB Studio
* TypeDB Console
* TypeDB Drivers:
** Java
** Python
** Node.js

To connect to a TypeDB Cloud deployment we need the following information:

* *Address* of any server in the deployment:
** Ip-address or domain name -- generated for every server in a deployment upon creation.
** Port number that the server is configured to listen to -- by default it's `1729`.
* *Credentials* of any user to authenticate on the server:
** Username -- by default it's `admin`.
** Password -- by default it's `password`.

////
* Whether the encryption is enabled or not.
** If the encryption is enabled - whether to use the default certificate or a custom one.
////
[IMPORTANT]
====
Connection to a TypeDB Enterprise server requires valid credentials of a user existing on that server.

It is not the same user as the user on TypeDB Cloud web portal that created or has access to the deployment.
====

To get the *address* of the server in a deployment use the following steps:

* Open the xref:deployments/life-cycle.adoc#_details[deployment details] page.
* Find the `Address` column in the table in the `Machines` section.

We can change the *credentials* with:

* xref:clients::console.adoc[TypeDB Console]
* Driver API:
** xref:clients::java/java-api-ref.adoc#_set_a_users_password[Java]
** xref:clients::python/python-api-ref.adoc#_set_a_users_password[Python]
** xref:clients::node-js/node-js-api-ref.adoc#_set_a_users_password[Node.js]

[#_connection]
== Connection

[tabs]
====
TypeDB Studio::
+
--
To connect to a TypeDB Cloud deployment with TypeDB Studio we can use the
xref:clients::studio.adoc#_connect_to_typedb_server[basic connection guide], but we need to select the TypeDB Cluster
option in the drop-down menu at the Connect to TypeDB window. That will display additional options to set addresses for
multiple servers in a cluster, username, password, and TLS encryption switch.

image::studio-connect.png[Connect to Studio window, width = 70%, link=self]

Use the btn:[Manage cluster addresses] button to set the address of a server to connect.

image::studio-manage-cluster-address.png[Connect to Studio window, width = 70%, link=self]

Insert the TypeDB Cloud deployment server address (including the port number, for example, `127.0.0.1:1729` or rather
`a242676f5710e462e9eed7a78d795ecb-1969767772.eu-west-2.elb.amazonaws.com:1729`) to the text field and press
the btn:[Add] button.

For more information on using TypeDB Studio, see the xref:clients::studio.adoc[] and the xref:typedb::quickstart.adoc[]
pages.
--

TypeDB Console::
+
--
include::cloud::quickstart.adoc[tag=console-connect]
--

TypeDB Java Driver::
+
--
[,java]
----
Set<String> addresses = new HashSet<>(Arrays.asList("127.0.0.1:1729"));
TypeDBCredential credentials = new TypeDBCredential("admin", "password", Path.of("/server/conf/encryption/ext-root-ca.pem"));
try (TypeDBClient.Cluster client = TypeDB.clusterClient(addresses, credentials)) { ... }
----

//#todo Update the code snippet with cluster version

For more information on the *cluster client* methods explore the TypeDB Java Driver API
xref:clients::java/java-api-ref.adoc#_instantiating_a_typedb_cluster_client[reference].

See the xref:clients::java/java-tutorial.adoc[] page to learn more about using the library.
--

TypeDB Python Driver::
+
--
[,python]
----
credentials = TypeDBCredential("admin", "password",
                               "/server/conf/encryption/ext-root-ca.pem")
client = TypeDB.cluster_client("127.0.0.1:1729", credentials)
----

For more information on the *cluster client* methods explore the TypeDB Python Driver API
xref:clients::python/python-api-ref.adoc#_instantiating_a_typedb_cluster_client[reference].

See the xref:clients::python/python-tutorial.adoc[] page to learn more about using the library.
--

TypeDB Node.js Driver::
+
--
[,js]
----
const client = await TypeDB.clusterClient(
        ["127.0.0.1:1729"],
        new TypeDBCredential("admin", "password", "/server/conf/encryption/ext-root-ca.pem")
    );
----

//#todo Update the code snippet with cluster version

For more information on the *cluster client* methods explore the TypeDB Node.js Driver API
xref:clients::node-js/node-js-api-ref.adoc#_instantiating_a_typedb_cluster_client[reference].

See the xref:clients::node-js/node-js-tutorial.adoc[] page to learn more about using the library.
--
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
Ideally, we want to use all servers of the deployments cluster to connect to in a TypeDB Client.

But if we set the address for only one server, upon connection, TypeDB Client will get information
of all servers in the cluster.
====

==  What to do next?

Upon successful connection to a server in a TypeDB Cloud deployment we can use the TypeDB Client we have used
to send some xref:typedb::fundamentals/queries.adoc[queries] to the server.

For example, complete our xref:typedb::quickstart.adoc[] with TypeDB Cloud deployment.

For more information, see the:

* xref:typedb::overview.adoc[TypeDB documentation] for general understanding of how to use TypeDB server,
* xref:clients::clients.adoc[TypeDB Clients documentation] for information on how to use Driver API methods,
TypeDB Studio GUI, or TypeDB Console CLI,
* xref:typeql::overview.adoc[TypeQL documentation] for advanced understanding of how to build a query and use patterns.
