cloud-src/modules/ROOT/pages/user-management/organization.adoc, before:

= Organizations
:keywords: typedb, cloud, organization
:longTailKeywords: typedb cloud organization, organization management, create organization
:pageTitle: Organizations
:summary: Organization management details.
:experimental:

// tag::intro[]
An organization combines all users and resources of your company.

By default, all users are created as the only member of their personal organization, named after their username.
// end::intro[]

[#_select]
== Select an active organization

// tag::select_organization[]
A user can be a member of multiple organizations.

To select an active one to work with at the moment, use the drop-down menu on top of the main navigation menu on the
left edge.
// end::select_organization[]

== Create a new organization

// tag::create_organization[]
To create a new organization open settings by clicking on the gear icon in the top right corner of any page of
TypeDB Cloud.

In the Settings page click on the btn:[New organization] button, set the new organization's visible name and unique id, and
click btn:[Submit].
// end::create_organization[]

== Join an organization

// tag::join_organization[]
The only way to join an existing organization is to be invited by one of its members.

For information on how to invite a user to join an organization, see the
xref:cloud::user-management/organization.adoc#_invite[Invite a user] section.
// end::join_organization[]

[#_invite]
== Invite a user

// tag::invite_into_organization[]
To invite a user to join an organization complete the following steps:

1. <<_select,Select>> the organization as active.
2. Open the Users page from the navigation menu on the left.
3. Click the btn:[Add] button in the top menu.
4. Enter the username of the user and click the btn:[Submit] button.
// end::invite_into_organization[]

[#_show]
== Show or edit details of an organization

// tag::details[]
Click on the btn:[Settings] in the main navigation menu on the left.

A page with details of the currently xref:cloud::user-management/organization.adoc#_select[selected] organization
will appear.

To edit details click on the btn:[Edit] button, edit details in the opened window, and click the btn:[Submit] button.
// end::details[]

Commit message:

User, account, team, projects, organization updates

cloud-src/modules/ROOT/pages/user-management/organization.adoc, after:

= Organizations
:keywords: typedb, cloud, organization
:longTailKeywords: typedb cloud organization, organization management, create organization
:pageTitle: Organizations
:summary: Organization management details.
:experimental:

// tag::intro[]
An organization combines all users and resources (deployments) of your company, as well as Projects (to group resources)
and Teams (to group users).

By default, all users are created as the only member of their personal organization, named after their User ID.
// end::intro[]

[#_select]
== Select an active organization

// tag::select_organization[]
A user can be a member of multiple organizations.

To select an active one to work with at the moment, use the drop-down menu on top of the main navigation menu on the
left edge.
// end::select_organization[]

== Create a new organization

// tag::create_organization[]
To create a new organization open settings by clicking on the gear (⚙) icon in the top right corner of any page of
TypeDB Cloud https://cloud.typedb.com[web portal].

In the Settings page click on the btn:[New organization] button, set the new organization's visible name and unique id, and
click btn:[Submit].
// end::create_organization[]

== Delete an organization

Open the xref:cloud::user-management/organization.adoc#_show[Organization details] page and click the
btn:[Delete organization] button at the end.

[NOTE]
====
To delete an organization there needs to be no Projects added to it.
====

== Join an organization

// tag::join_organization[]
The only way to join an existing organization is to be invited by one of its members.

For information on how to invite a user to join an organization, see the
xref:cloud::user-management/organization.adoc#_invite[Invite a user] section.
// end::join_organization[]

[#_invite]
== Invite a user

// tag::invite_into_organization[]
To invite a user to join an organization complete the following steps:

1. <<_select,Select>> the organization as active.
2. Open the Users page from the navigation menu on the left.
3. Click the btn:[Add] button in the top menu.
4. Enter the User ID of the user and click the btn:[Submit] button.
// end::invite_into_organization[]

[#_show]
== Show or edit details of an organization

// tag::details[]
1. xref:cloud::user-management/organization.adoc#_select[Select] an active organization.
2. Click on the btn:[Settings] in the main navigation menu on the left.

[caption=""]
.Alternatively
====
1. Click on the gear (⚙) icon in the top right corner of any page of TypeDB Cloud https://cloud.typedb.com[web portal]
   and click on the Settings.
2. Select an organization from the list by clicking on it.
====

[start=3]
1. A page with the details of the selected organization will appear.

To edit details click on the btn:[Edit] button, edit details in the opened window, and click the btn:[Submit] button.
// end::details[]
