02-clients/02-console.md, before:

---
pageTitle: TypeDB Console
keywords: typedb, console
longTailKeywords: load schema into typedb, create typedb database, typedb console
summary: List of options and commands for the TypeDB Console.
toc: false
---

# TypeDB Console

The TypeDB Console, along with the [Studio](01-studio.md), is a software tool that we can use to interact
with TypeDB server. It is a tool of choice for those who prefer command line interfaces over GUI or needs to automate 
some operations with TypeDB.

It has unique set of functions and abilities to interact with a TypeDB database:

- Interactive command line interface (CLI) with built-in documentation
- Connection to TypeDB servers, including database management.
- Query execution, including schema and data, read and write transactions.
- Response processing and text output.
- Script mode to run a set of commands from a file.
- Command argument to run commands from command line arguments.

## Installation

TypeDB Console distributed with TypeDB server and does not need an installation.

## Connect to TypeDB

If the TypeDB is installed in the system (usually means we can launch it with `typedb server` command) then the path
to the TypeDB Console is all set, so we can launch the Console by issuing the following command:

```bash
typedb console
```

The above command will try to establish connection with a TypeDB server on the default address of `localhost:1729`. 
To connect to a different address use the `--server` argument followed by a TypeDB server IP address and port: 
`0.0.0.0:1729`.

If the typedb command is not recognized it means that the path to TypeDB binary is not set in the system. We can find 
TypeDB binary in the TypeDB distributive. To start the Console navigate into the directory with unpacked distributive 
and run:

```bash
./typedb console

```

As a result we should get a welcome message from TypeDB Console followed by a console command invitation.

```bash
Welcome to TypeDB Console. You are now in TypeDB Wonderland!
Copyright (C) 2022 Vaticle

>
```

### TypeDB Cloud

There is a slight difference when accessing TypeDB Cloud as it requires additional parameters (`cluster`, 
`username`,`password`, etc.):

```bash
./typedb console --cluster=127.0.0.1:1729 --username=<username> --password --tls-enabled=<true|false>

```

As a result we will get a password request.

```bash
Password: 
```

Type in the correct password for the user selected in the command before and receive a welcome message from TypeDB 
Console followed by a console command invitation.

```bash
Welcome to TypeDB Console. You are now in TypeDB Wonderland!
Copyright (C) 2022 Vaticle

>
```

### Locale settings

TypeDB can store string attributes that have characters outside the [ASCII](https://ascii.cl/) range (for example:
non-English letters, symbols, and emojis). To manipulate them using Console, the console terminal must use a locale
with a compatible code set, such as Unicode.

If it doesn't, these characters will most likely be rendered as "?" symbols in Console. If this issue occurs we can use 
the following fix:

<div class="tabs light">

[tab:Linux]
Use `locale -a` to list all installed locales, and use `export` to set the environment. For example, to use 
`en_US.UTF-8` run:

```bash
export LANG=en_US.UTF-8 && export LC_ALL=en_US.UTF-8
```
[tab:end]

[tab:MacOS]
Use `locale -a` to list all installed locales, and use `export` to set the environment. For example, to use
`en_US.UTF-8` run:

```bash
export LANG=en_US.UTF-8 && export LC_ALL=en_US.UTF-8
```
[tab:end]

[tab:Windows]
Use [Windows Terminal](https://apps.microsoft.com/store/detail/windows-terminal/9N0DX20HK701?hl=en-gb&gl=GB) or run 
[chcp](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/chcp) in the terminal (e.g: 
`chcp 936` for Chinese text)
[tab:end]

</div>

Most systems also allow us to set the system-wide locale, however this impacts the appearance of other applications.

## Command line arguments

We can provide several command-line arguments when running Console in the terminal.

| Option                  | Alias  | Description                                                           |
|-------------------------|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `--server=<address>`    |        | Address to which Console will connect to. (TypeDB only)               |
| `--cluster=<address>`   |        | Address to which Console will connect to. (TypeDB Cluster only)       |
| `--username=<username>` |        | Username (TypeDB Cluster only)                                        |
| `--password`            |        | Password (TypeDB Cluster only)                                        |
| `--tls-enabled`         |        | Whether to connect with TLS encryption (TypeDB Cluster only)          |
| `--tls-root-ca=<path>`  |        | Path to the TLS root CA file (TypeDB Cluster only)                    |
| `--help`                | `-h`   | Show help message.                                                    |
| `--command=<commands>`  |        | Commands to run in the Console, without interactive mode              |
| `--script=<script>`     |        | Script with commands to run in the Console, without interactive mode. |
| `--version`             | `-V`   | Print version information and exit.                                   |

## Console commands

TypeDB Console provides two levels of interaction: database-level commands and transaction-level commands. 
The database-level command is the first level of interaction, i.e. first-level 
[REPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read%E2%80%93eval%E2%80%93print_loop). From one of the database-level commands, we
can open a transaction to the database. This will open a transaction-level interface, i.e. second-level REPL.

### Database management commands

Give any of these commands inside a console at the `>` prompt.

| Command                                   | Description                                                                                                            |
|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `database create <db>`                    | Create a database with name `<db>` on the server.                                                                      |
| `database list`                           | List the databases on the server                                                                                       |
| `database delete <db>`                    | Delete a database with name `<db>` on the server                                                                       |
| `database schema <db>`                    | Print schema of a database with name `<db>` on the server                                                              |
| `user create <username>`                  | Create a user with name `<username>` on the server (TypeDB Cluster only)                                               |
| `user list`                               | List the users on the server (TypeDB Cluster only)                                                                     |
| `user delete <username>`                  | Delete a user with name `<username>` on the server (TypeDB Cluster only)                                               |
| `transaction <db> schema⎮data read⎮write` | Start a transaction to database `<db>` with session type `schema` or `data`, and transaction type `write` or `read`.   |
| `help`                                    | Print help menu                                                                                                        |
| `clear`                                   | Clear console screen                                                                                                   |
| `exit`                                    | Exit console                                                                                                           |

### Transaction querying commands

Give any of these commands inside a console at the `>` prompt.

| Command         | Description                                                                                                                                  |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `<query>`       | Once we're in the transaction REPL, the terminal immediately accepts a multi-line TypeQL query, and will execute it when we hit enter twice. |
| `source <file>` | Run TypeQL queries in a file, which we can refer to using relative or absolute path. On Windows escape `\` by writing `\\`.                  |
| `commit`        | Commit the transaction changes and close transaction.                                                                                        |
| `rollback`      | Will remove any uncommitted changes we've made in the transaction, while leaving transaction open.                                           |
| `close`         | Close the transaction without committing changes, and takes us back to the database-level interface, i.e. first-level REPL.                  |
| `help`          | Print this help menu.                                                                                                                        |
| `clear`         | Clear console screen.                                                                                                                        |
| `exit`          | Exit console.                                                                                                                                |

### Transaction options

The following flags can be passed to the `transaction <db> schema⎮data read⎮write` command, for example:

```
transaction typedb data read --infer true
```

| Option                          | Allowed values | Description                                                    |
|---------------------------------|----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `--infer`                       | `true⎮false`   | Enable or disable inference                                    |
| `--trace-inference`             | `true⎮false`   | Enable or disable inference tracing                            |
| `--explain`                     | `true⎮false`   | Enable or disable inference explanations                       |
| `--parallel`                    | `true⎮false`   | Enable or disable parallel query execution                     |
| `--batch-size`                  | `1..[max int]` | Set RPC answer batch size                                      |
| `--prefetch`                    | `true|false`   | Enable or disable RPC answer prefetch                          |
| `--session-idle-timeout`        | `1..[max int]` | Kill idle session timeout (ms)                                 |
| `--schema-lock-acquire-timeout` | `1..[max int]` | Acquire exclusive schema session timeout (ms)                  |
| `--read-any-replica`            | `true|false`   | Allow or disallow reads from any replica (TypeDB Cloud only)   |

### Non-interactive mode

To invoke TypeDB Console in a non-interactive manner, we can define a script file that contains the list of commands to 
run, then invoke console with `typedb console --script=<script>`. 

We can also specify the commands to run directly 
from the command line using `typedb console --command=<command1> --command=<command2> ...`.

For example given the following command script file:

<!-- test-ignore -->
```
database create test
transaction test schema write
    define person sub entity;
    commit
transaction test data write
    insert $x isa person;
    commit
transaction test data read
    match $x isa person;
    close
database delete test
```

We will see the following output:

<!-- test-ignore -->
```
> ./typedb console --script=script                                                                                                                                                                                                                    73.830s
+ database create test
Database 'test' created
+ transaction test schema write
++ define person sub entity;
Concepts have been defined
++ commit
Transaction changes committed
+ transaction test data write
++ insert $x isa person;
{ $x iid 0x966e80017fffffffffffffff isa person; }
answers: 1, duration: 87 ms
++ commit
Transaction changes committed
+ transaction test data read
++ match $x isa person;
{ $x iid 0x966e80018000000000000000 isa person; }
answers: 1, duration: 25 ms
++ close
Transaction closed without committing changes
+ database delete test
Database 'test' deleted
```

The indentation in the script file are only for visual guide and will be ignored by the console. Each line in the 
script is interpreted as one command, so multiline query is not available in this mode.

## Examples

The following example illustrates how to create a database, define a schema, and insert some data into TypeDB.

<!-- test-ignore -->
```typeql
$ typedb console

Welcome to TypeDB Console. You are now in TypeDB Wonderland!
Copyright (C) 2020 TypeDB Labs

> database create typedb
Database 'typedb' created

> database list
typedb

> transaction typedb schema write
typedb::schema::write> define person sub entity;

Concepts have been defined
typedb::schema::write> commit
Transaction changes committed

> transaction typedb data write
typedb::data::write> insert $p isa person;

{ p iid 0x966e80017fffffffffffffff isa person; }
typedb::data::write> commit
Transaction changes committed

> exit
```

The above example creates a database with name `typedb`, lists all databases an the server, defines a schema for the 
database created earlier, then inserts an instance of `person` type into the database.

The following example achieves the same results but with the `typedb2` database name via command line arguments. 

<!-- test-ignore -->
```typeql
typedb console --command="database create typedb2" \
--command="database list" \
--command="transaction typedb2 schema write" \
--command="define person sub entity;" \
--command="commit" \
--command="transaction typedb2 data write" \
--command='insert $p isa person;' \
--command="commit" 
```

The resulting output should look like this:

<!-- test-ignore -->
```bash
+ database create typedb2
Database 'typedb2' created
+ database list
typedb
typedb2
+ transaction typedb2 schema write
++ define person sub entity;
Concepts have been defined
++ commit
Transaction changes committed
+ transaction typedb2 data write
++ insert $p isa person;
{ $p iid 0x826e80017fffffffffffffff isa person; }
answers: 1, total (with concept details) duration: 56 ms
++ commit
Transaction changes committed
```

Commit message:

Fixing old naming TypeDB Cluster into TypeDB Cloud

02-clients/02-console.md, after:

---
pageTitle: TypeDB Console
keywords: typedb, console
longTailKeywords: load schema into typedb, create typedb database, typedb console
summary: List of options and commands for the TypeDB Console.
toc: false
---

# TypeDB Console

The TypeDB Console, along with the [Studio](01-studio.md), is a software tool that we can use to interact
with TypeDB server. It is a tool of choice for those who prefer command line interfaces over GUI or needs to automate 
some operations with TypeDB.

It has unique set of functions and abilities to interact with a TypeDB database:

- Interactive command line interface (CLI) with built-in documentation
- Connection to TypeDB servers, including database management.
- Query execution, including schema and data, read and write transactions.
- Response processing and text output.
- Script mode to run a set of commands from a file.
- Command argument to run commands from command line arguments.

## Installation

TypeDB Console distributed with TypeDB server and does not need an installation.

## Connect to TypeDB

If the TypeDB is installed in the system (usually means we can launch it with `typedb server` command) then the path
to the TypeDB Console is all set, so we can launch the Console by issuing the following command:

```bash
typedb console
```

The above command will try to establish connection with a TypeDB server on the default address of `localhost:1729`. 
To connect to a different address use the `--server` argument followed by a TypeDB server IP address and port: 
`0.0.0.0:1729`.

If the typedb command is not recognized it means that the path to TypeDB binary is not set in the system. We can find 
TypeDB binary in the TypeDB distributive. To start the Console navigate into the directory with unpacked distributive 
and run:

```bash
./typedb console

```

As a result we should get a welcome message from TypeDB Console followed by a console command invitation.

```bash
Welcome to TypeDB Console. You are now in TypeDB Wonderland!
Copyright (C) 2022 Vaticle

>
```

### TypeDB Cloud

There is a slight difference when accessing TypeDB Cloud as it requires additional parameters (`cluster`, 
`username`,`password`, etc.):

```bash
./typedb console --cluster=127.0.0.1:1729 --username=<username> --password --tls-enabled=<true|false>

```

As a result we will get a password request.

```bash
Password: 
```

Type in the correct password for the user selected in the command before and receive a welcome message from TypeDB 
Console followed by a console command invitation.

```bash
Welcome to TypeDB Console. You are now in TypeDB Wonderland!
Copyright (C) 2022 Vaticle

>
```

### Locale settings

TypeDB can store string attributes that have characters outside the [ASCII](https://ascii.cl/) range (for example:
non-English letters, symbols, and emojis). To manipulate them using Console, the console terminal must use a locale
with a compatible code set, such as Unicode.

If it doesn't, these characters will most likely be rendered as "?" symbols in Console. If this issue occurs we can use 
the following fix:

<div class="tabs light">

[tab:Linux]
Use `locale -a` to list all installed locales, and use `export` to set the environment. For example, to use 
`en_US.UTF-8` run:

```bash
export LANG=en_US.UTF-8 && export LC_ALL=en_US.UTF-8
```
[tab:end]

[tab:MacOS]
Use `locale -a` to list all installed locales, and use `export` to set the environment. For example, to use
`en_US.UTF-8` run:

```bash
export LANG=en_US.UTF-8 && export LC_ALL=en_US.UTF-8
```
[tab:end]

[tab:Windows]
Use [Windows Terminal](https://apps.microsoft.com/store/detail/windows-terminal/9N0DX20HK701?hl=en-gb&gl=GB) or run 
[chcp](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/chcp) in the terminal (e.g: 
`chcp 936` for Chinese text)
[tab:end]

</div>

Most systems also allow us to set the system-wide locale, however this impacts the appearance of other applications.

## Command line arguments

We can provide several command-line arguments when running Console in the terminal.

| Option                  | Alias  | Description                                                           |
|-------------------------|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `--server=<address>`    |        | Address to which Console will connect to. (Not for the TypeDB Cloud)  |
| `--cluster=<address>`   |        | Address to which Console will connect to. (TypeDB Cloud only)         |
| `--username=<username>` |        | Username (TypeDB Cloud only)                                          |
| `--password`            |        | Password (TypeDB Cloud only)                                          |
| `--tls-enabled`         |        | Whether to connect with TLS encryption (TypeDB Cloud only)            |
| `--tls-root-ca=<path>`  |        | Path to the TLS root CA file (TypeDB Cloud only)                      |
| `--help`                | `-h`   | Show help message.                                                    |
| `--command=<commands>`  |        | Commands to run in the Console, without interactive mode              |
| `--script=<script>`     |        | Script with commands to run in the Console, without interactive mode. |
| `--version`             | `-V`   | Print version information and exit.                                   |

## Console commands

TypeDB Console provides two levels of interaction: database-level commands and transaction-level commands. 
The database-level command is the first level of interaction, i.e. first-level 
[REPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read%E2%80%93eval%E2%80%93print_loop). From one of the database-level commands, we
can open a transaction to the database. This will open a transaction-level interface, i.e. second-level REPL.

### Database management commands

Give any of these commands inside a console at the `>` prompt.

| Command                                   | Description                                                                                                          |
|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `database create <db>`                    | Create a database with name `<db>` on the server.                                                                    |
| `database list`                           | List the databases on the server                                                                                     |
| `database delete <db>`                    | Delete a database with name `<db>` on the server                                                                     |
| `database schema <db>`                    | Print schema of a database with name `<db>` on the server                                                            |
| `user create <username>`                  | Create a user with name `<username>` on the server (TypeDB Cloud only)                                               |
| `user list`                               | List the users on the server (TypeDB Cloud only)                                                                     |
| `user delete <username>`                  | Delete a user with name `<username>` on the server (TypeDB Cloud only)                                               |
| `transaction <db> schema⎮data read⎮write` | Start a transaction to database `<db>` with session type `schema` or `data`, and transaction type `write` or `read`. |
| `help`                                    | Print help menu                                                                                                      |
| `clear`                                   | Clear console screen                                                                                                 |
| `exit`                                    | Exit console                                                                                                         |

### Transaction querying commands

Give any of these commands inside a console at the `>` prompt.

| Command         | Description                                                                                                                                  |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `<query>`       | Once we're in the transaction REPL, the terminal immediately accepts a multi-line TypeQL query, and will execute it when we hit enter twice. |
| `source <file>` | Run TypeQL queries in a file, which we can refer to using relative or absolute path. On Windows escape `\` by writing `\\`.                  |
| `commit`        | Commit the transaction changes and close transaction.                                                                                        |
| `rollback`      | Will remove any uncommitted changes we've made in the transaction, while leaving transaction open.                                           |
| `close`         | Close the transaction without committing changes, and takes us back to the database-level interface, i.e. first-level REPL.                  |
| `help`          | Print this help menu.                                                                                                                        |
| `clear`         | Clear console screen.                                                                                                                        |
| `exit`          | Exit console.                                                                                                                                |

### Transaction options

The following flags can be passed to the `transaction <db> schema⎮data read⎮write` command, for example:

```
transaction typedb data read --infer true
```

| Option                          | Allowed values | Description                                                    |
|---------------------------------|----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `--infer`                       | `true⎮false`   | Enable or disable inference                                    |
| `--trace-inference`             | `true⎮false`   | Enable or disable inference tracing                            |
| `--explain`                     | `true⎮false`   | Enable or disable inference explanations                       |
| `--parallel`                    | `true⎮false`   | Enable or disable parallel query execution                     |
| `--batch-size`                  | `1..[max int]` | Set RPC answer batch size                                      |
| `--prefetch`                    | `true|false`   | Enable or disable RPC answer prefetch                          |
| `--session-idle-timeout`        | `1..[max int]` | Kill idle session timeout (ms)                                 |
| `--schema-lock-acquire-timeout` | `1..[max int]` | Acquire exclusive schema session timeout (ms)                  |
| `--read-any-replica`            | `true|false`   | Allow or disallow reads from any replica (TypeDB Cloud only)   |

### Non-interactive mode

To invoke TypeDB Console in a non-interactive manner, we can define a script file that contains the list of commands to 
run, then invoke console with `typedb console --script=<script>`. 

We can also specify the commands to run directly 
from the command line using `typedb console --command=<command1> --command=<command2> ...`.

For example given the following command script file:

<!-- test-ignore -->
```
database create test
transaction test schema write
    define person sub entity;
    commit
transaction test data write
    insert $x isa person;
    commit
transaction test data read
    match $x isa person;
    close
database delete test
```

We will see the following output:

<!-- test-ignore -->
```
> ./typedb console --script=script                                                                                                                                                                                                                    73.830s
+ database create test
Database 'test' created
+ transaction test schema write
++ define person sub entity;
Concepts have been defined
++ commit
Transaction changes committed
+ transaction test data write
++ insert $x isa person;
{ $x iid 0x966e80017fffffffffffffff isa person; }
answers: 1, duration: 87 ms
++ commit
Transaction changes committed
+ transaction test data read
++ match $x isa person;
{ $x iid 0x966e80018000000000000000 isa person; }
answers: 1, duration: 25 ms
++ close
Transaction closed without committing changes
+ database delete test
Database 'test' deleted
```

The indentation in the script file are only for visual guide and will be ignored by the console. Each line in the 
script is interpreted as one command, so multiline query is not available in this mode.

## Examples

The following example illustrates how to create a database, define a schema, and insert some data into TypeDB.

<!-- test-ignore -->
```typeql
$ typedb console

Welcome to TypeDB Console. You are now in TypeDB Wonderland!
Copyright (C) 2020 TypeDB Labs

> database create typedb
Database 'typedb' created

> database list
typedb

> transaction typedb schema write
typedb::schema::write> define person sub entity;

Concepts have been defined
typedb::schema::write> commit
Transaction changes committed

> transaction typedb data write
typedb::data::write> insert $p isa person;

{ p iid 0x966e80017fffffffffffffff isa person; }
typedb::data::write> commit
Transaction changes committed

> exit
```

The above example creates a database with name `typedb`, lists all databases an the server, defines a schema for the 
database created earlier, then inserts an instance of `person` type into the database.

The following example achieves the same results but with the `typedb2` database name via command line arguments. 

<!-- test-ignore -->
```typeql
typedb console --command="database create typedb2" \
--command="database list" \
--command="transaction typedb2 schema write" \
--command="define person sub entity;" \
--command="commit" \
--command="transaction typedb2 data write" \
--command='insert $p isa person;' \
--command="commit" 
```

The resulting output should look like this:

<!-- test-ignore -->
```bash
+ database create typedb2
Database 'typedb2' created
+ database list
typedb
typedb2
+ transaction typedb2 schema write
++ define person sub entity;
Concepts have been defined
++ commit
Transaction changes committed
+ transaction typedb2 data write
++ insert $p isa person;
{ $p iid 0x826e80017fffffffffffffff isa person; }
answers: 1, total (with concept details) duration: 56 ms
++ commit
Transaction changes committed
```
